Introduction

The Viable System Agent, or VSA is a software implementation of the
Viable System Model (VSM), a model for autonomous systems developed by
Stafford Beer. The VSA provides structure, communications, auditing
and alerting as defined in the VSM. The VSA is intended to facilitate
creating and managing autonomous software systems. Think of the VSA as
common instrumentation and communications for autonomous agents.

History

One of the best known projects making use of the VSM was an attempted
real-time computer-controlled planned economy in the years 1970 to
1973. It was called Project Cybersyn. The system used a telex network,
applications running on an IBM 360 computer and a specially designed
operations room for decision making. Given the advances in computers
and networks, the VSM has the potential to be far more automated
today.

Subsystems

A VSA includes five subsystems.

Corporate

System 5 (the executive) maintains system identity and controls
communications throughout the VSA. System 4 (the planner) monitors the
environment and plans for the future. System 3 (the manager) controls
and reports on subordinate operation activities. Together, systems 3,
4 and 5 act as a triumvirate guiding the entire system.

Autonomic

A VSA may have one or more subordinate operations, composed of
supervisor/ operation pairs. A supervisor (system 2) provides
coordination and communications functions. An operation (system 1) is
a primary activity of the VSA. These pairs are managed by system 3.

Recursion

The entire VSA is also an operation and acts as a wrapper around all
the other sub- systems. It represents the upward facing activity of
the VSA as a whole, and may be subordinate to another VSA.

Notes

By default, VSA instances start their own manager (3), planner (4),
and executive (5) instances. This is to support Beer's ideas of
cybernetic isomorphism. The idea is that all operations function as
fully viable systems in their own right, possibly having embedded
operations.

The system 2 runs as a peer instance with the 3, 4 and 5 instances
inside a VSA. The system 2 is paired with a VSA is part of the upward
facing communications with the next tier of control.

Measuring achievement

A big part of the VSM is measuring the achievement of operations. Beer
breaks this out into three measures reflecting the "here and now"
compared to the "there and then". The measures can represent "more is
better" numbers such as net income or web impressions served. They can
also represent "less is better" numbers such as man hours used or amps
consumed.

Achievement measures

Actuality - What we are doing now, with existing resources, under
existing constraints

Capability - What we could be doing right now with existing resources,
under existing constraints

Potentiality - What we could be doing by developing our resources and
removing constraints

Achievement calculations

Beer provides calculations to aid in monitoring overall performance of
an operation. In addition to the familiar productivity calculation,
other calculations allow actuality and capability to be compared in
respect to potential growth. Profit center calculations are shown. The
terms may be reversed for a cost center.

Productivity - The ratio of actuality and capability

Latency - The ratio of capability and potentiality

Performance - The ratio of actuality and potentiality, and also the
product of latency and productivity

The latency calculation can determine if productivity is being
increased at the expense of capability. This might be particularly
useful in times of growth.

Alerts and audits

Alerts are sent by an operation to the manager when actuality deviates
by a statistically significant amount from capability
(productivity). Audit messages will be sent by the manager to
operations to audit productivity (actuality/capability).

References

Primary

Beer, Stafford. The Heart of Enterprise (1979). Chichester: John Wiley
& Sons.

Beer, Stafford. Brain of the Firm (2nd ed./1981). Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons.

Additional

Bayne, Jay S. Cyberspatial Mechanics, IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics-part b: Cybernetics, Vol. 38, No. 3, June
2008. IEEE.

Block, F., Cottle, S., Murray, R. Graham and Dodd's Security Analysis
(5th ed./1988). New York: McGraw-Hill Inc.

Harrison, P. J., and Stevens, C. F., 'A Bayesian Approach to
Short-term Forecasting', Operational Research Quarterly, 22,
No. 4. December 1971.

Harrison, P. J., and Stevens, C. F., 'Bayesian Forecasting', Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 38, No.3,
1976.

Herring, Charles E. The Viable System Model for Software
(2000). Brisbane, Australia: University of Queensland.

Herring, Charles E. The Pattern of the Viable System and its Language
(2001). Brisbane, Australia: University of Queensland.

Herring, Charles E. Groove: A Case Study in Adaptive Architecture
(2001). Brisbane, Australia: University of Queensland.

McMillan, Lawrence G. Options as a Strategic Investment (4th
ed./2002). New York: New York Institute of Finance.

Medina, Eden. Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in
Allende's Chile (2011). Boston, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
